Proper statistical methodology in general and proper use of
a test set in particular give a clear path detect overfitting.
Essentially, when the model's performance on the test set is
noticeably lower than on the training and validation sets,
then this is evidence that the model may have been over fit.
Of course, it is also possible that there was a structural change.
Meaning that the structure of the market was
different over the period used as the test set.
This is a distinct kind of problem,
as even good researchers can be negatively impacted by structural change,
whereas good researchers are definitionally
never guilty of overfitting by definition of good research.
Structural changes may be possible to anticipate.
An example would be regulatory changes which fundamentally alter market structure.
Such changes are often announced before they're implemented.
Nevertheless, in both cases overfitting and structural change,
the practical implications are the same.
One does not expect the model to continue to perform in the out-of-sample period,
which is the coming year or two,
and use of the model in unadulterated form could
lead to overtrading and or investment losses.
The future is the ultimate out-of-sample test set.
It is a dataset which we know for sure hasn't been seen before or used in
research or biased the strategy development
in some subtle way that is hard to even fathom.
Before one can believe the Sharpe ratio of a back-test,
one must first believe that the back-test in
some past year represents the state of knowledge that one had back then,
basing that period as if it were the future.
This is harder than it sounds.
We must want to see the world as it truly is and not as we wish it to be.